# Client application of our cool grid 🚀

✨ **This workspace has been generated by [Nx, a Smart, fast and extensible build system.](https://nx.dev)** ✨

## Install nvm to more convenient development in the future

[Reference to guide how to install and use nvm](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/node-version-manager-nvm-install-guide/)

In this project we're using node 18, that is mean you should switch to node 18:

```bash
nvm install 18 && nvm use 18
```

After closing terminal, nvm will set version to default which you installed first.

To set default version node you could use this command (use your version that you want instead "your_version"):

```bash
nvm alias default your_version
```

Now when you will close terminal default version of node will be "your_version"

## To install yarn

```bash
npm install -g yarn
```

## Our project contains custom registry packages

You will notice file .yarnrc.yml This file contain custom registry.
To install all packages without errors you should ask frontend team for the credentials. And [set Environment Variables](https://chlee.co/how-to-setup-environment-variables-for-windows-mac-and-linux/) NPM_USER and NEXUS_PASS from our custom registry.

## Install dependencies

```bash
yarn install
```

## To run application in dev mode (serving with hot reload)

To run main quantgrid application use this command:

```bash
yarn nx serve quantgrid
```

To run other application you could use name of other application

## Before creating a Merge Request run format and lint commands to clean up the code:

```bash
yarn format
yarn lint
```

## Environment variables

To set environment variables you should set them using the file `apps/quantgrid/external-env.js`

## Authentication

To run an application with authentication, you should set `authAuthority` and `authClientId` variables in file `apps/quantgrid/external-env.js`:

## Graph of the related libraries and applications

Run `nx graph` to see a diagram of the dependencies of the projects.

## E2E

### Installation

To run tests you need to have playwright installed. Run:

```bash
yarn playwright install --with-deps
```

### Running

By default tests run against the staging environment. To run E2E tests against a locally running quantgrid:

1. Start the app:

```bash
yarn nx serve quantgrid
```

2. In a new terminal set BASE_URL to your local address and run the E2E target. Example (macOS/Linux):

```bash
BASE_URL=http://localhost:4200 yarn nx e2e quantgrid
```

PowerShell example (Windows):

```powershell
$env:BASE_URL='http://localhost:4200'; yarn nx e2e quantgrid
```

Alternatively, add BASE_URL to `apps/quantgrid/.env` and then run:

```bash
yarn nx e2e quantgrid
```

It will run in headless mode by default, to have it in ui mode pass `--ui` argument to previous command

```bash
yarn nx e2e quantgrid --ui
```

_Note_: you can change the target browsers by editing the section `projects` in `frontend\apps\quantgrid\playwright` directory

### Environment variables

You should set next environment variables globally or create `.env` file in `apps/quantgrid` folder:  
| Variable | Description | Supported values |
|---|---|---|
| `BASE_URL` | Url to test | Can be empty |
| `AUTH_TYPE` | Authentication type used on the local environment | `auth0`, `keycloak` |
| `QUANTGRID_TEST_USERNAME` | Valid username for the application | any valid username |
| `QUANTGRID_TEST_PASSWORD` | Password for the user specified in `QUANTGRID_TEST_USERNAME` | corresponding password |
| `WORKER_COUNT` | Amount of workers where tests run | number |

### Allure

#### Installation

1. Go to [releases](https://github.com/allure-framework/allure2/releases/) and download the latest version selecting suitable archive type  
   Unpack the archive
2. Add allure bin directory to the PATH env variable

#### Generate allure report

run `allure generate ./allure-results -o ./allure-report --clean`

#### Open allure report

in the case of report generated locally, run `allure open allure-report`  
in the case of gitlab report, extract the report to some directory and run `allure open "path_to_extracted_directory"`
