Questions
1. Is single cell with data/formula different from the one-cell-table?
2. When user enters data/formula into cell next to (right or bottom) another cell, is it two cells or two-cell-table?
3. Can range of cells be referenced?
4. Is vertical table acts any different to horizontal one (See write DSL examples 1 and 2)? 
5. User entered data/formula in the middle of the sheet. No names assigned. How to address it?
6. User entered column of data points/formulas in the middle of the sheet. No names assigned. How do you address the column?
7. How do you address specific cell inside such column?
8. User entered row of data points/formulas in the middle of the sheet. No names assigned. How do you address the row?
9. How do you address specific cell inside such row?
10. How to address row of the table? (If there are multiple options depending on the table type, give all of them)
11. What is DSL for defining formula for the row? (all options)
12. How to address column of the table? (all options)
13. What is DSL for defining for the column? (all options)
14. How to address the cell? (all options)
15. Having table rows are indicators, columns are years. Can I get row for profit, and later take value for 2020 for it? How?
16. Having row, how can I say what indicator it's for?
17. Can I get column for 2020 and then take profit from it? How?
18. Having column, how can I say what year it's for?
19. Imagine I have table generated by RANGE(10), row number in column [r]. 
    - Now for each row I want to select indicators (rows) which have values for 2020 less than [r]? 
    - How can I select years (columns) which has profit less than [r]?
 
Write DSL for the tables
1. 4colsxNrows. table. First three are: Country, GDP, Population, loaded from the file. Fourth column: GDP per capita = GDP/Population
2. 2colsx3rows table. Rows are 1. "Revenue", 10M. 2. "Cost of Revenue", 500K. 3. "Gross profit", =Revenue - Cost of Revenue. 
3. Input file with rows: (Date, Indicator, Value). Table: rows are Indicators, columns are dates cells are value. Can I write formula for new indicator or projection for the next year?
